[TRTLLM-11412][feat] Add offloading support for visual_gen (#14095)
NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM: docs/source/models/visual-generation.md

Reviewer: we wanna keep this doc lean so just 1 line here similar to teacache would work. Detailed should be found in class docstrings (feature-specific docs in the future).
Also add to the feature matrix above ^

- Sparse attention support: see [VisualGen Sparse Attention](../visual-gen/features/sparse-attention.md).
- Multi-GPU parallelism (CFG parallel, Ulysses sequence parallel, Tensor parallelism).
- **Step caching** — two runtime caching backends (**TeaCache** and **Cache-DiT**) that skip transformer computation on steps where the step-to-step change is small.

> - CPU offloading for Wan text-to-video pipelines to reduce peak GPU memory usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CPU offloading to reduce peak GPU memory usage.
```

### Feature Matrix

| Model | FP8 blockwise | NVFP4 | TeaCache | Cache-DiT | CPU Offloading | CFG Parallelism | Ulysses Parallelism | Parallel VAE | CUDA Graph | torch.compile | trtllm-serve | Attention2D | Ring Attention | Tensor Parallelism |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **FLUX.1** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No [^1] | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| **FLUX.2** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No [^1] | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| **Wan 2.1** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | T2V only | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |

> | **Wan 2.2** | Yes | Yes | Yes [^2] | Yes | T2V only | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |

Reviewer 2: Yes / No with footnote.

Author: Updated

### Feature Matrix

| Model | FP8 blockwise | NVFP4 | TeaCache | Cache-DiT | CPU Offloading | CFG Parallelism | Ulysses Parallelism | Parallel VAE | CUDA Graph | torch.compile | trtllm-serve | Attention2D | Ring Attention | Tensor Parallelism | VSA |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **FLUX.1** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No [^1] | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
| **FLUX.2** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No [^1] | Yes | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
| **Wan 2.1** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes [^6] | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
| **Wan 2.1 VSA** [^2] | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes [^6] | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No | Yes | Yes |

> | **Wan 2.2** | Yes | Yes | Yes [^3] | Yes | Yes [^6] | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Wan 2.1** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
| **Wan 2.1 VSA** [^2] | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No | Yes | Yes |
| **Wan 2.2** | Yes | Yes | Yes [^3] | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
```

[^5]: Qwen-Image ships a native BF16 implementation with per-module numerical parity against `diffusers.QwenImagePipeline` (cosine similarity >= 0.999 on the full 20B transformer) and supports `trtllm-serve` / `/v1/images/generations`. VisualGen supports FP8 blockwise and NVFP4 dynamic quantization from BF16 checkpoints, as well as direct loading of statically quantized FP8 and NVFP4 ModelOpt checkpoints.

> [^6]: CPU offloading is currently validated for Wan and Cosmos3 text-to-video pipelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^6]: CPU offloading of Cosmos3 is currently validated the text-to-video pipelines.
```

[^7]: `FastVideo/FastWan2.2-TI2V-5B-FullAttn-Diffusers` — a distilled version of Wan2.2-TI2V-5B with 3 denoising steps. CFG parallelism, TeaCache, and Cache-DiT are not applicable.

[^8]: CPU offloading is currently validated for Wan and Cosmos3 text-to-video pipelines.

> 

Reviewer 2: No need to add such footnote since it's already shown in the matrix.

Should be fine to use `/bot reuse` if the current CI and pushed any new doc commits.

Author: done

    - **Attention2D** (`attn2d_size: [N, M]`): Shards the sequence axis across an `N × M` device mesh (total CP degree = `N · M`; not combinable with Ulysses).
    - **Ring Attention** (`ring_size: N`): Shards the sequence axis across a 1D ring of `N` ranks, streaming K/V blocks (mutually exclusive with Attention2D).
- **Tensor Parallelism** (`tp_size: N`): Splits attention heads and transformer MLPs across GPUs for faster compute and reduced memory usage.

### Troubleshooting

**Out of memory:** enable quantization (`quant_config`), reduce resolution or `num_frames`, enable TeaCache (`cache_config`), enable CPU offloading (Wan T2V), or shard the model across more GPUs with Ulysses or Attention2D parallelism.

**Parallelism constraints:**

- Total GPUs must equal `cfg_size × ulysses_size` (Ulysses) or `cfg_size × attn2d_row_size × attn2d_col_size` (Attention2D).
- Ulysses requires the model's attention-head count to be divisible by `ulysses_size`, and the sequence length to be divisible by `ulysses_size`.

> - Attention2D requires an LSE-capable backend (`FA4` or `CUTEDSL`), the sequence length to be divisible by `attn2d_row_size × attn2d_col_size`, and cannot be combined with Ulysses.

Reviewer: rebase issue?

**Wan 2.2 dual-transformer note:** Wan 2.2 uses two expert transformers (high-noise and low-noise stacks). All `CacheDiTConfig` parameters apply to both stacks, except `max_warmup_steps` and `max_cached_steps`: the low-noise stack always uses fixed internal caps (`max_warmup_steps=2`, `max_cached_steps=20`) regardless of user config.

### CPU Offloading (Wan T2V only)

> CPU offloading stages move selected Wan T2V pipeline components between CPU and GPU to reduce peak GPU memory usage; enable it with `cpu_offload_config.enable: true` or `--enable_offloading` in the example script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CPU offloading stages move selected Wan T2V pipeline components between CPU and GPU to reduce peak GPU memory usage; enable it with `cpu_offload_config.enable: true`
```

    vsa_sparsity: 0.90
```

> ### CPU Offloading (Wan and Cosmos3 T2V)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### CPU Offloading
```
